---
layout: post
title: Sampler
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

> A seedling is a young plant sporophyte developing out of a plant embryo from a seed. Seedling development starts with germination of the seed.

This website is a metaphorical seedling—it is the start of something. With a bit of nurturing it can become a fully grown Jekyll site.

<!--more-->

## Typography

Websites are mostly typography, so it’s important to get it right. Here’s a regular paragraph. Let’s see what it looks like when we *emphasize words*, or even **strengthen them**.

This many letters should fit onto one line. The line should end by the end of this sentence. If this sentence is still on the first line, then our line length is too long. The average line length should be 45–90 characters (including spaces). The first sentence in this paragraph is 44 characters long including the period. The first two sentences combined are 93 characters.

### Lists

Some lists are ordered, and some are unordered. There are also description lists.

#### Ordered lists

1. This is the first item in the list
2. Here’s the second one
3. This is the next one
4. All things must be done step-by-step

#### Unordered lists

- A list
- Of items
- In no particular order
- It is not important which comes first and which comes last

##### Nested unordered lists

- Food
  - Fruits
    - Pineapple
    - Orange
    - Watermelon
    - Pomegranate
  - Veggies
    - Carrot
    - Lettuce
    - Cabbage
- Clothing items
  - Hats
  - Shirts
  - Trousers

### Blockquotes

> A seedling is a young plant sporophyte developing out of a plant embryo from a seed. Seedling development starts with germination of the seed.

### Tables

| Name       | Favourite colour | Favourite pie   |
| :--------- | :--------------- | :-------------- |
| Alexander  | Hard to pick!    | Maybe peach?    |
| Elmo       | Red              | Apple           |
| Grover     | Blue             | Chocolate cream |
| Oscar      | Green            | Banana cream    |
